Moores 1
Jacob Moores
Redacted
Redacted
19 November 2024
Betrayal and Resistance Theory Found in Othello
The tragedy of Othello follows a Venetian army group on their journey from Venice to
Cyprus, and the betrayal of Iago to Othello as an act of defiance to Othello's leadership. This
rebelion transpires quickly into the play and the group's journey, with Iago methodically
disobeying all who he associates with while trying to ruin Othello's life. His disobedience is not
without cause, however, as Iago believes Cassio should not have been promoted to Othello's
lieutenant. With his coinciding distaste of both Cassio and Othello, Iago begins to operate against
the way he is perceived of acting with the army. This disobedience is carefully executed, with
Iago acting as his perceived self around those he wishes to betray, and acting as the villain
around the select few individuals he can trust. Throughout the play, both Iago and Othello are
products of resistance theory, as Iago’s resistance to Othello births, in his mind, the idea that
Cassio is the member of his group resisting his leadership. This resistance appears in three
defining moments throughout the play, being the setup of a drunken Cassio, the brainwashing of
Othello by Iago, and during the play's final scene where many characters are killed by the hands
of another.
Iago's revenge towards Othello has been impending for some time prior to the play, and
the promotion of Cassio to lieutenant finally leads to Iago preparing this revenge. Alaeddin
Nahvi writes in his paper on the evils of Iago, stating “Iago’s jealousy is actually the most critical
issue in this play”(Nahvi 510). Taking place outside of the house of Brabantio (the father of


Moores 2
Othello's wife Desdemona) during Act 1, Scene 1, Iago speaks to his associate, Rodrigo, about
his displeasure of working under Othello. “In following him, I follow but myself. Heaven is my
judge, not I for love and duty, But seeming so for my peculiar end.” (1.1.64-66). This line of
dialogue foreshadows the obedience Iago is willing to display moving forward in his life.
Although he has to follow Othello's command, it’s only done to benefit himself. Iago feels that
nobody has any authority over himself, especially those in a position of power like Othello.
Iago’s hate is further reiterated later in Act 1, Scene 3. In this monologue to the audience, Iago
holds nothing back of his hate for his superior. “I hate the Moor, And it is thought abroad that
’twixt my sheets’ Has done my office. I know not if ’t be true, But I, for mere suspicion in that
kind, Will do as if for surety”(1.3.429-433). It’s now confirmed that Iago hates Othello, and with
justification. Iago believes that his wife, Emilia, has committed adultery with Othello. Regardless
of its merit, Iago believes it to be reason enough to ruin Othello's life. To garner revenge for
Othello's wrongdoing, Iago feels that situation is one that relates to the biblical expression “an
eye for an eye”, or in the case of this play, a wife for a wife. Iago needs to hurt the wife of
Othello to receive justice for the actions done to Emilia. To set in motion the chain of events
which lead to Desdemona's death, Iago decides to make the recently promoted Cassio his puppet,
using him as a way to torment Othello to his breaking point.
To begin his rebellion against Othello, Iago starts breaking down another man who is
above his army rank, the newly appointed lieutenant Cassio. After the destruction of a Turkish
fleet, and to commemorate the wedding of Othello and Desdemona, a celebration is held on
Cyprus, consisting of plentiful amounts of food and wine. It is at this time, Iago’s plan starts to
take place, attempting to get Cassio drunk from the wine. It’s made known to the audience that
wine is a vice to Cassio, as he states “I have very poor and unhappy brains for


Moores 3
drinking.”(2.2.32-33) Iago still manages to pressure Cassio into drinking, regardless of his pleas
to remain sober. After drinking, Cassio acts much less composed as he was, and is clearly
intoxicated. After singing a number of songs together, Cassio and Iago share a brief conversion
about the afterlife, where both men pray they go to heaven. The separation between Iago and
Cassio’s class is brought up again, with Cassio stating “ The lieutenant is to be saved before the
ancient.”(2.2.105-106) This point of class differentiation reinstills the purpose of Iago's
interaction with Cassio, reminding the audience of the resistance theory at play. To combat this
statement, Iago begins to plant the seeds of Cassio being an alcoholic in people's minds, while
using Roderigo as another puppet in his personal play. Cassio returns into the scene chasing
Roderigo, threatening to “...beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.” (2.2.147) Montano, now aware
of Cassio’s drunken state, begins to fight Cassio until Othello appears to discipline Cassio. David
Wood writes that “Cassio's drunken brawling and subsequent demotion serves as the spur to the
narrative of the play's events even as it provides an humoral template for Othello's destruction”
(Wood). Iago's plan to ruin Othello is slowly, but surely starting to fall into place. To destroy and
rebel against those of a higher class than himself, Iago brings these people down to his level,
allowing him to simultaneously resist the governing powers of those who are meant to keep him
in line, while subsequently raising his value in this military ecosystem.
Iago has now earned a greater amount of Othello's trust, while subsequently making
Othello second guess himself for promoting a volatile Cassio. Cassio is also more susceptible for
being Iago's pawn, which he subsequently makes use of to further attack Othello. Veronika
Walker suggests that Cassio is now acting as a foil to Othello. “Cassio seems to represent the
impishness of youth, the suave, debonair, and eye-catching gallantry that attracts lady folk to
military men, whilst Othello represents the wisdom, experience, and backbone - both the brains


Moores 4
and brawn - of any army’s foundation.” (Walker). This disparity between Cassio and Othello is
exactly what Iago has wanted, and he plans to further their relationship and disassemble Othello's
wellbeing by abusing Cassio’s romantic tendencies. In Act 3, Scene 1, Cassio talks to Iago's
Wife, Emilia, about getting the chance to meet with Desdamona alone about making peace with
Othello again. When Desdamona and Cassio are finally having their conversation in Act 3, Scene
3, Shakespeare foreshadows Desdemona's fate towards the end of one of her short monologues,
with her stating that “For thy solicitor shall rather die Than give thy cause away.”(3.3.29-30)
Staying true to the nature of her character, Desdemona does meet her fate by Othello's hands at
the end of the play, achieving the opposite of convincing Othello to re-promote Cassio to his
former roll. After this conversation, Cassio leaves the room quickly once Otthello approaches,
not wanting him to know he spoke to Desdamona about the ongoing matter. Iago continues with
his mission of destroying Othello by using Cassio, as Iago states “Ha! I like not that”(3.3.37)
when he notices Cassio leaving the room currently occupied with Desdamona and Emilia.
Othello is already frustrated, and to fuel this fire even more, Iago begins to start a ploy that
Desdamona is having an affair with Cassio.
Othello originally committing adultery with Emilia is what leads to Iago wanting to
overthrow the high-ranking Othello, and making Othello become an apparent victim of such a
crime is the perfect way to get revenge. The love affair that Iago suggests is only thought to be
true by Othello, but Othello's tunnel vision in the matter, and the repetition of Desdamona
mentioning Cassio, is enough to make the matter seem real. Desdamona, for the remainder of the
play, has a motif linked with her dialogue. On nearly every occasion that Desdamona and Othello
talk, Desdamona always talks about Cassio. In Act 3, Scene 3, when Othello and Desdamona
have a conversation in the presence of Iago and Emilia, Desdamona pleads to Othello that he


Moores 5
should meet again with Cassio from lines 55 to 99. In Act 4, Scene 1, Desdamona meets with
Othello again and explains to Lodovico the dispute between Othello and Cassio, and how she
“...would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.”(4.1.243-244) Othello hears this
clearly, as in his mind the usage of the word “love” in her sentence has much stronger
connotations than she really intends. This motif continues through the rest of the play, coming to
a close before Desdamona’s death, with Othello finally accusing her of adultery with Cassio. The
relation between Resistance theory and this motif is due to both Iago and Cassio being
responsible for disintegrating Othello's wellbeing. Before Cassio was demoted for fighting
Montano, Othello held Cassio in high regards, even referring to Cassio as his friend (“The
servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? The goodness of the night upon you,
friends!”(1.2.37-39) Cassio, at this point, had no negative impact on Othello nor was there intent
to harm him. Cassio was not of the same military rank at this time, yet he was close enough to
make the difference between him and Othello negligible. It is only when Cassio is demoted to the
same rank as Iago, that Cassio begins to be a burden to Othello. This speaks to resistance theory
due to Othello being put through peril by a lower classed member of his army group. Even
though Cassio never committed his accused act of adultery, Othello still feels that Cassio is
actively trying to ruin his life since his demotion, therefore in his mind, seeing Cassio as an
oppositionalist to himself, thus being another example of resistance theory in the play.
By the end of the play, Othello has finally been driven to lunacy by Iago. In Act 5, Scene
2, the play’s finale, Othello is undeniably convinced that Desdamona has had an affair with
Cassio, and promptly confronts her in their room. Moving backwards to Act 3, Scene 3, Othello
starts to succumb to the reality of Desdamona having an affair, upon acceptance shouting the
phrase “Oh, blood, blood, blood!”(3.3.504) Jennifer Feather views this statement to have much


Moores 6
significance throughout the remainder of the play, particularly how, around the sixteenth century,
“‘blood’ dictates rank, culture, and identity”(Feather 240). Blood is referenced a number of times
throughout the preceding of the play, but carries a number of meanings to each who speaks of it.
For Othello, blood “encapsulates the tensions between these two modes of self-understanding—
one that sees blood as stable and another that understands it as constantly in flux”(Feather 240).
Believing that his own blood is in a state of flux, Othello feels that he must spill Desdemona's
blood to neutralize his own. Again at Act 5, Scene 2, Othello finally smothers Desdamona after
berating her with adultery accusations as she begs for her life. Desdamona does eventually die
after Othello smothers her, but not until Emelia enters the room to her dying words of innocence.
The events that occur around this murder also revolve around bloodshed. Iago finishes the killing
of Rodrigo handed out by Cassio in the prior act, then Iago kills Emilia, followed by Othello
stabbing the imprisoned Iago, and finally Othello ending his own life. All of the bloodshed was
carried out in an act to rebalance one’s own blood. Othello realized that the killing of Desdamona
was in vain, thus leaving his essence still in turmoil. To finally heal himself, Othello decides he
must end the life of the monster he has created, “I took by the throat the circumcisèd dog, And
smote him, thus.”(5.2.407-408) Iago finally achieves his goal of overthrowing Othello, yet in the
process is potentially mortally injured, and made a powerless prisoner with all members of
society now above him instead of below. Cassio, the unfortunate pawn of the play, is the only
character who receives justice, being the only successful executor of resistance theory after being
involuntarily put in the position by Iago.
Othello is ultimately a tragedy which revolves around power struggle and revealing one's
true self. Resistance theory plays an important role through the play, giving characters like Iago
and Cassio justification for their actions and treatment. Iago was the initial character who desired


Moores 7
to overthrow Othello, believing he had had an affair with Emilia. Cassio also became involved in
Resistance theory, in Othello's mind, as upon demotion Cassio was thought to have had an affair
with Desdamona. Iago did succeed at ruining the life of Othello. He made Othello kill
Desdamona, and eventually himself after realizing his wife was innocent all along. Iago was
ultimately blinded by his resistance, however, as he ends up becoming a prisoner at the end of
the play, and will presumably be put to death if not succumbing to his stab wound first. Instead,
Cassio is the true victor of being involved in resistance theory. Iago, the man who turned Cassio
into a pawn, has now ruined his own life, and is suffering the consequences for his actions, while
Cassio gets promoted to the “lord governor” (5.5.423) after the death of Othello, his superior
who almost ruined his life. Iago disobeyed all who were above him and lost everything, while
Cassio stayed in line and was rewarded for staying nobel throughout his suffering.


Moores 8
Works Cited
Shakespeare, William. “Othello.” Edited by Barbra A. Mowat, Paul Werstine, Folger
Shakespeare Library, 15 Apr. 2015
Nahvi, Alaeddin. “Iago as the Embodiment of Evil.” DAV International Journal of Science, vol.
4, no. 4, Aug. 2015, p. 510,
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Alaeddin-Nahvi/publication/303407253_IAGO_AS_THE_
EMBODIMENT_OF_EVIL/links/57421c7708aea45ee84a3766/IAGO-AS-THE-EMBODIMEN
T-OF-EVIL.pdf.
Wood, David Houston. “‘Fluster’d with flowing cups’: Alcoholism, Humoralism, and the
Prosthetic Narrative in Othello.” Disability Studies Quarterly, vol. 29, no. 4, 2 Oct. 2009,
https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v29i4.998.
Walker, Veronika. “ Michael Cassio as a Foil to Shakespeare’s Othello.” Inquiries
Journal/Student Pulse, vol. 2, no. 02, 2010,
http://www.inquiriesjournal.com/articles/163/michael-cassio-as-a-foil-to-shakespeares-othello.
Feather, Jennifer. “‘O blood, blood, blood’: Violence and Identity in Shakespeare’s ‘Othello.’”
Medieval & Renaissance Drama in England, vol. 26, 2013, p. 240,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24322748.
