Moores 1
Jacob Moores
Redacted
Redacted
30 September 2022
Conformity is an Expression of Insecurity
The laws and rules that have been created for society are one of the distinctions that
separate humans from their primordial ancestors. It is through the inconsistencies of these laws
where conformity has to be introduced. Members of a society will constantly try to get ahead of
one another by utilizing loopholes found in the law, thus causing leaders to create strict
consequences for those who choose not to follow these specific laws. This is how conformity
begins in a society. The introduction of conformity brings with it the evident insecurities
amongst those who introduce the conforming, as well as those who advocate it. But it is not only
the leaders who exhibit their insecurities. Conformity expresses the insecurities in all affected
parties, as it masks leaders' fears, displays people's unwillingness to resist conforming, and
proves the motives in which anarchists act upon.
A community's strength is parallel to its leader's apparent strength, so anything that can be used
to make a leader appear weak is frequently pointed out by their opposition, and on occasion, their
followers. The leaders' insecurities, then, are hidden behind the act of conformity. An example of
this throughout history can be seen through the People's Republic of China, which is currently
the acting government for China. This government has enforced a system in select parts of the
country called the “Social Credit System” and acts as an autonomous method to enforce wide
scale conformity upon all in the system. The system functions by starting all citizens with a base
credit of one thousand (Donnelly), and adding or removing points based upon their actions,


Moores 2
which are constantly monitored by cameras. A user's credit changes their standing in society. The
higher a person's score, the more opportunities they will have access to in life, and vice versa.
The acts which lead to the highest point removal are often those most frowned upon by the
government, and acts which grant the most points are most appreciated. This system is a glaring
reflection of the leaders' angst and insecurities. They force their people to conform to a set of
standards which they deem to be acceptable and, if the people choose to transgress, they are
treated as mere outcasts in their society. Therefore, victims of such treatment have no choice but
to adhere to conformity so that their lives do not become nullified, and the insecurities of the
leaders’ can remain unearthed.
In a functioning society, it’s known that there are different hierarchical levels. At the top resides
the leaders, the introducers of conformity. Below that level exists the working class. This social
standing contains the majority of the population, and can be defined as anyone who works a
career strictly to provide their labor or knowledge, and expects nothing but a salary in return.
These workers “have little control over the pace or the content of their work”(Gray,
Kish-Gephart). From a young age, individuals are conditioned to obey those of a higher
authority, whether it be their parents, teachers, or anyone else deemed to have prestige. This
foundational knowledge is abused later in life by those same people. The working class of
society cannot mask their insecurities by making others conform, but their insecurities can be
reflected through an unwillingness to rebel and stand up for what they believe in. A person who
conforms to their government’s strict laws (in fear of the outcome) can be deemed as reasonable,
as far as working class conformists go. This obedience is purely out of fear, knowing that if they
step out of line, the consequences could be fatal. An individual who conforms to a single person
acts purely out of insecurity, and not of fear. These are the people who allow conformity to


Moores 3
function. The insecurities of the working class are not as broad as their leaders, but rather they
reflect a conditioned insecurity which is shared amongst their class.
Both parties whose insecurities are displayed strictly through conformity have been named: The
leaders, and the working class conformists. There remains one more group, deemed to be below
the working class in a functioning society. This group of people are known as anarchists. To be
an anarchist is to rebel against conformity and any repressing laws and, as defined by Theodore
John Kaczynski, “The anarchist too seeks power, but he seeks it on an individual or small-group
basis; he wants individuals and small groups to be able to control the circumstances of their own
lives”(Kaczynski). The aforementioned groups have insecurities towards their own fears.
Anything they can do to repress these fears will be done, hence why conformity is enforced on
the majority of the population. In contrast to these groups, anarchists’ insecurities are found to be
antithetical to the conformist. If there is a law or order in place that an anarchist feels is a
violation of their basic rights, then rebellion ensues. Someone who is classified as an anarchist
would view the conformist as being an insecure member of society. This belief is false, as
anarchists have their insecurities exhibited by conformity as well. The main insecurity of an
anarchist is fitting in with the masses. If forced to conform, whether it be by wearing specific
clothing, worshiping a single deity, or following explicit orders, the anarchist will attempt to
revolt against any conformity. Their insecurity is near palpable at this point, as if the anarchist
does not rebel, they will feel shameful, guilty, and insecure that their actions are not of their
choosing.
Insecurities exist in everyone. What contrasts people's insecurities from one another are their
methods of exhibition. The leaders are insecure about disorder in their society, so they make
rules that people must conform to. The conformist is insecure about the retaliation that would


Moores 4
follow with stepping out of line, so they willingly oblige to the conforming. The anarchist is
insecure about blending into the crowd and not living their own life, so they make it their life's
mission to rebel against any conformity that is seemingly unethical or unjust. Conformity will
always exist, and regardless of the position that a person plays in its process, conformity will
always act as a glaring expression of a person's insecurity.


Moores 5
Works Cited
Donnelly, Drew. “China Social Credit System Explained - How It Works [2022].”
Horizons, 22 Sept. 2022,
https://nhglobalpartners.com/china-social-credit-system-explained/.
Gray, Barbara, and Jennifer J. Kish-Gephart. “Encountering Social Class Differences at
Work: How ‘Class Work’ Perpetuates Inequality.” Academy of Management Review, vol.
38, no. 4, 2013, pp. 672–672., https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2012.0143.
Kaczynski, Theodore John. Industrial Society and Its Future the Unabomber's Manifesto.
Anti-Authoritarians Anonymous, 1995.
