Moores 1
Jacob Moores
Redacted
Redacted
9 April 2025
The Gradual Regression of Violence Censorship in Romanticism
Beyond the work of Wordsworth, there have been a selection of poets who have kept
romanticism alive by having elements of the style present in selections of their writing. One of
these elements is the presence of violence, specifically a writer's aversion against censoring it.
Although living through the same time period as Wordsworth, Shelley’s poem Ode to the West
Wind has traces of violence which stand out in a romantic work observing the might of nature.
Rossetti’s Goblin Market portrays elements of romanticism by not censoring its violence,
allowing for it to be a central part of her poem. Wilfered Owen, the latest of these authors, also
did not censor violence, using the horrors of war as an outlet of his emotion in the poem Dulce et
Decorum Est. By adding moments of violence in their works, these authors assist in keeping
romanticism alive, exhibiting how its elements are essential in creating a powerful piece of
writing.
The poem Ode to the West Wind does not have the intense moments of violence which are
found in poems by the aforementioned authors, but have small moments of violent language
which are distinguishable from the praises of nature and passionate emotion which can be found
within the romantic style of writing. One of these moments are early in the poem, with Shelley
writing “The winged seeds, where they lie cold and low / Each like a corpse within its
grave”(7-8). In these lines there is a seed, a part of nature responsible for new life, which is being
juxtaposed with the image of a dead body lying within its final resting place. Rather than taking


Moores 2
the more common romantic approach of praising nature for its ability to sustain itself with the
seed, Shelley uses a morbid, more violent representation of what the seed looks like in its
dormant state, absent of any praise towards nature. Nature is still made to be the main focus of
this poem, with each stanza of the poem making reference to it, but nature is not coddled by
Shelley, who in this poem is not looking to solely preserve its grandeur.
Goblin Market by Christina Rossetti intensifies the amount of violence which can be
found in a romantic piece of writing, although there is still some amount of restraint shown. In
this poem, the assaults of Laura and Lizzie create the largest moments of drama and intensity,
and although some deliberate acts of violence are masked by using various fruits as euphemisms
for sexual organs, they can still be deciphered by Rossetti’s descriptions. One of these
euphemisms is found in the assault of Lizzie while visiting the goblins and their market.
Twitch’d her hair out by the roots,
Stamp’d upon her tender feet,
Held her hands and squeez’d their fruits
Against her mouth to make her eat.(404-407)
There is undeniable physical assault happening in this excerpt, with the verbs of ‘twitch’ and
‘stamp’ being associated with violence. Squeezing and eating fruit is not a violent action, but
when the meaning of the fruit in this section is uncensored, it creates a moment more violent than
the assault taking place on her hair and feet. There are a number of other violent actions
described which take place during the previous and upcoming lines of the poem, yet some are
still censored by using fruits as a euphemism, restraining some of the violence in the poem until
it is given a closer read. Much like Ode to the West Wind, there is a clear effort made to introduce
violence to a romantic piece of writing, yet there is still caution taken when writing about it.


Moores 3
The inclusion of violence in Dulce et Decorum Est by Wilfred Owen does not show the
restraint practiced by Rossetti in Goblin Market, or minimal use seen in Ode to the West Wind. In
this poem, Owen writes about the horrors of war, and how it should not be glorified by those
hoping to enlist young men to fight for their country. Apart from the mortar fire and gas attacks
the narrator describes seeing on the battlefield, the memory which haunts them the most is of
their comrade succumbing to the mustard gas which coated the air in a thick green fog. “In all
my dreams before my helpless sight, / He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning”(15-16).
The narrator is mentally scarred by what he has seen on the battlefield, with the sight of this man
spewing frothy blood from his mouth being stuck with him forever. Owen’s writing does not try
to mask the violence that a person can experience during the war, insisting instead on making it
the focal point of this poem by using simple imagery to detail what the narrator experiences. In
doing this, Owen is able to convey the message of war not being as glorious as the
unexperienced may describe it, while also putting his own passion for this topic on display by
using the shock factor created by not censoring any violence. This creates a direct link to the
romantic style of writing, avoiding the masking of violence while still expressing his own
passion.
Violence has the ability to exist in many different ways in poetry. Some violence can be
related closer to the morbidity of life like in Ode to the West Wind, alluded to more thoroughly in
works such as Goblin Market, or put on the forefront like in Dulce et Decorum Est. Regardless
of the portrayal of violence in literature, there is still a direct connection to romanticism with its
inclusion. Gradually lowering the censorship of violence in romantic writing over time shows
how writers such as Shelley, Rossetti, and Owen were writing in hopes of keeping romanticism
alive, allowing for the romantic style of writing to stay alive long past Wordsworth.


Moores 4
Works Cited
Owen, Wilfred. “Dulce et Decorum Est.” Poetry Foundation,
www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/46560/dulce-et-decorum-est. Accessed 2025.
Rossetti, Christina. “Goblin Market.” Poetry Foundation,
www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/44996/goblin-market. Accessed 2025.
Shelley, Percy. “Ode to the West Wind.” Poetry Foundation,
www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/45134/ode-to-the-west-wind. Accessed 2025.
