Moores 1
Jacob Moores
Redacted
Redacted
21 October 2022
The Elimination of General Studies at MUN
Over Nineteen thousand students (Sorensen) have chosen MUN to become their eventual alma
mater. This number is gradually increasing, with enrollment rising ten percent every five years.
Despite this population increase, all students must complete their general year, regardless of their
program, financial class, or prior academic success. For many, this isn’t an issue. They have a
pool of money to dip into to pay for courses, and can handle the additional course workload.
However, there are a number of students who lack adequate finances and non-material resources.
This makes a post secondary education less of a right, and more of an extortionate privilege. The
solution to this problem is clear; The General Studies year should be eliminated from all MUN
first year programs. The additional courses that students are required to take are often too much
additional expense, and their addition takes away from the overall time students can dedicate to
their main courses. Despite the minimal benefits from paying hundreds of thousands to take
these general courses, their existence helps to offer a smoother transition from high school to
university.
The typical workload for a full time first year MUN student is three to five courses (Memorial
University). Of these courses, it is rarely the case that all are necessary for acceptance into a
specific faculty. Take, for example, a first year student who is attempting to enter into the
Department of Computer Science. Of the ten courses that the university recommends, only six
are “required” for entry into the program (Memorial University). The other forty percent of


Moores 2
courses still have to be done, but offer nothing to the student in terms of program entry. In the
Fall semester of 2022, a student can expect to pay (in CAD) anywhere from $256 to $2000 per
course (Memorial University), varying upon student circumstances. If a student has to take four
extra courses, the additional cost could range anywhere from $1024 to $8000. Having to pay
such a substantial amount of money to do “mandatory” courses is near coercion, and is a tax that
many cannot afford. If there was great importance to do these courses, the cost would be
justified. This is not true, as regardless of the program a student is entering, these courses are
nothing more than general.
The commodity which many consider to be as valuable as money, is time. In an article by Simon
Fraser University, it is recommended that students study each of their courses for “2-3 hours per
credit per week” (McGee-Thompson). This number becomes 6-9 hours, as most first year
courses amount to three credit hours. If a first year student is attempting to enter a faculty, and
did not have to complete general courses, they would have three courses to study every week.
Based upon Simon Fraser’s recommendation, a student would spend around 18-27 hours per
week studying. This is a reasonable number, as the student could study for around three to five
hours each day. The problem arises when the course load is increased from three classes per
semester to five. An extra 12-18 hours of study are then recommended per week, or 30-45 hours
overall. In a study by Nick Huntington-Klein and Andrew Gill in 2021, it was proved that there
is little variation in a student’s grades based strictly on course load, rather more variation based
upon a student’s personality and mental health (Huntington-Klein and Gill). So although a
student with five courses and strong personality may not see a drop in marks, an anxious student
may experience detrimental decreases in their marks, possibly ruining their chances of being
accepted into a faculty. A University should give all students an even chance in succeeding, so


Moores 3
removing the general courses from a student’s course load would give everyone more time to
study their important courses, and have a less adverse effect on their mental health.
For all the downsides of a general year, there has to be redeeming qualities which allow it to
remain common practice. The most beneficial general year trait is the transition it provides from
high school to university. In recent years, Newfoundlands Department of Education has removed
public exams from all high schools in an attempt to promote mental wellbeing, and as an attempt
to change the style that they assess students (Hood). Grading schemes are becoming less based
upon what a student knows, and more about how hard a student tries. This change is not mutual
with MUN. The jump from doing minimal work in high school, to having multiple exams per
semester, is an extreme change for all students. Having a number of general courses with
minimal or no exams can assist a student to better adjust to the archaic university system, rather
than struggling to keep up with it in perpetuity.
University is becoming a significant period of more and more people's lives. The memories
people want to associate with their post-secondary experience are all of positive nature, yet more
and more are leaving university with crippling student debt, without the degree they initially
wanted, and generally a bad taste in their mouth. The student experience would become more
optimistic if the general year is removed. Students could more easily afford the courses they
actually need, and then spend more time studying for these courses. Although this transitional
period will no longer be present, its absence will separate the ambitious, hard working students
from those who do not want to pursue an illustrious university degree.


Moores 4
Works Cited
Sorensen, David, and Dave Sorensen. “Record Numbers.” Gazette, 25 Sept. 2020,
https://gazette.mun.ca/campus-and-community/record-numbers/.
Memorial University. “Classification of Students.” 6 General Academic Regulations
(Undergraduate), 2022, https://www.mun.ca/regoff/calendar/sectionNo=REGS-0474.
Memorial University. “Computer Science: Undergraduate Admissions and Programs.” Memorial
University of Newfoundland, 22 July 2022,
https://www.mun.ca/undergrad/first-year-information/sample-first-year---st-johns-campus/scienc
e/computer-science/.
Memorial University. “New Tuition Framework: Undergraduate Admissions and Programs.”
Memorial University of Newfoundland, 12 July 2022,
https://www.mun.ca/undergrad/money-matters/new-tuition-framework/.
McGee-Thompson, Donna. “How to Study Efficiently and Effectively.” SFU Library, 19 Apr.
2021,
https://www.lib.sfu.ca/about/branches-depts/slc/learning/exam-prep/efficient-effective-study#:~:t
ext=Tips%20on%20pacing%20your%20studying,devoted%20to%20studying%20per%20week.
Huntington-Klein, Nick, and Andrew Gill. “Semester Course Load and Student
Performance - Research in Higher Education.” SpringerLink, Springer Netherlands, 18 Oct.
2020, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11162-020-09614-8.
Hood, Jillian. “Public Exams Cancelled for 2021-22 School Year, under Review for Future
Years.” Government of Newfoundland, 22 Sept. 2021,
https://www.gov.nl.ca/releases/2021/education/0922n01/.
